# Melanoma-detection-case-study

The cardinal objective of this project is to develop state of the art Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model to perform the classiﬁcation of skin lesion images into respective cancer types. The model is trained and tested on the dataset made available by International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC). The model can beused for analyzing the lesion image and ﬁnd out if it’s dangerous at early stage.

## Table of Contents
#general-information)
Generally, skin cancer is of two types: melanoma and non-melanoma. Melanoma also called as Malignant Melanoma is the 19th most frequently occurring cancer in women and men. It is the deadliest form of skin cancer.In the year 2015, the global occurrence of melanoma was approximated to be over 350,000 cases, with around 60,000 deaths.
The most prevalent non-melanoma tumours are squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma. Non-melanoma skin cancer is the 5th most frequently occurring cancer, with over 1 million diagnoses worldwide in 2018. As of 2019, greater than 1.7 Million new cases are expected to be diagnosed [3]. Even though the mortality is significantly high, but when detected early, survival rate exceeds 95%. This motivates us to come up with a solution to save millions of lives by early detection of skin cancer. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) or ConvNet, are a class of deep neural networks, basically generalized version of multi-layer perceptrons. CNNs have given highest accuracy in visual imaging tasks. This project aims to develop a skin cancer detection CNN model which can classify the skin cancer types and help
in early detection. The CNN classification model will be developed in Python using Keras and Tensorflow in the backend. The model is developed and tested with different network architectures by varying the type of layers used to train the network including but not limited to Convolutional layers, Dropout layers, Pooling layers and Dense layers. The model will also make use of Transfer Learning techniques for early convergence. The model will be tested and trained on the dataset collected from the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) challenge archives.

#technologies-used
CNN Architecture Design
To classify skin cancer using skin lesions images. To achieve higher accuracy and results on the classification task, I have built custom CNN model.

Rescalling Layer - To rescale an input in the [0, 255] range to be in the [0, 1] range.
Convolutional Layer - Convolutional layers apply a convolution operation to the input, passing the result to the next layer. A convolution converts all the pixels in its receptive field into a single value. For example, if you would apply a convolution to an image, you will be decreasing the image size as well as bringing all the information in the field together into a single pixel.
Pooling Layer - Pooling layers are used to reduce the dimensions of the feature maps. Thus, it reduces the number of parameters to learn and the amount of computation performed in the network. The pooling layer summarises the features present in a region of the feature map generated by a convolution layer.
Dropout Layer - The Dropout layer randomly sets input units to 0 with a frequency of rate at each step during training time, which helps prevent overfitting.
Flatten Layer - Flattening is converting the data into a 1-dimensional array for inputting it to the next layer. We flatten the output of the convolutional layers to create a single long feature vector. And it is connected to the final classification model, which is called a fully-connected layer.
Dense Layer - The dense layer is a neural network layer that is connected deeply, which means each neuron in the dense layer receives input from all neurons of its previous layer.
Activation Function(ReLU) - The rectified linear activation function or ReLU for short is a piecewise linear function that will output the input directly if it is positive, otherwise, it will output zero.The rectified linear activation function overcomes the vanishing gradient problem, allowing models to learn faster and perform better.
Activation Function(Softmax) - The softmax function is used as the activation function in the output layer of neural network models that predict a multinomial probability distribution. The main advantage of using Softmax is the output probabilities range. The range will 0 to 1, and the sum of all the probabilities will be equal to one
Model: "sequential"
_________________________________________________________________
 Layer (type)                Output Shape              Param #   
=================================================================
 rescaling (Rescaling)       (None, 180, 180, 3)       0         
 conv2d (Conv2D)             (None, 180, 180, 32)      2432      
 conv2d_1 (Conv2D)           (None, 180, 180, 32)      25632     
max_pooling2d (MaxPooling2D) (None, 90, 90, 32)       0                                                                   
conv2d_2 (Conv2D)           (None, 90, 90, 32)        25632     
max_pooling2d_1(MaxPooling 2D) (None, 45, 45, 32)       0                                                         
conv2d_3 (Conv2D)           (None, 45, 45, 64)        51264     
max_pooling2d_2 (MaxPooling 2D)   (None, 22, 22, 64)       0                                                                     
conv2d_4 (Conv2D)           (None, 22, 22, 64)        102464                                                                    
max_pooling2d_3 (MaxPooling 2D)    (None, 11, 11, 64)       0         
dropout (Dropout)           (None, 11, 11, 64)        0                                                       
flatten (Flatten)           (None, 7744)              0                                                                      
dense (Dense)               (None, 9)                 69705         
                                                                                                                               
=================================================================
Total params: 277,129
Trainable params: 277,129
Non-trainable params: 0

* [Conclusions](#conclusions)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

<!-- You can include any other section that is pertinent to your problem -->

## General Information
- Provide general information about your project here.
- What is the background of your project?
- What is the business probem that your project is trying to solve?
- What is the dataset that is being used?

<!-- You don't have to answer all the questions - just the ones relevant to your project. -->

## Conclusions
- Conclusion 1 from the analysis
- Conclusion 2 from the analysis
- Conclusion 3 from the analysis
- Conclusion 4 from the analysis

<!-- You don't have to answer all the questions - just the ones relevant to your project. -->


## Technologies Used
- library - version 1.0
- library - version 2.0
- library - version 3.0

<!-- As the libraries versions keep on changing, it is recommended to mention the version of library used in this project -->

## Acknowledgements
Give credit here.
- This project was inspired by...
- References if any...
- This project was based on [this tutorial](https://www.example.com).


## Contact
Created by [@githubusername] - feel free to contact me!


<!-- Optional -->
<!-- ## License -->
<!-- This project is open source and available under the [... License](). -->

<!-- You don't have to include all sections - just the one's relevant to your project -->



















